I'm Martin P. Sutter, and I'm a native of the
Midwest. I grew up in a very small town in Michigan,
came down to LSU on a basketball scholarship way,
way, way back when, when short white guys still
could get basketball scholarships. That was back
in 1972, 73. And how I really tied into Mitchell was
I initially started studying chemical
engineering at LSU and later switched over to
business and finance, but went to work with a CPA
firm initially out of school. Pete Marwick here in
Houston. But after about two and a half years of
being more in financial advisory services and
that, there was enough of that engineer in me that
wanted to grab onto something nuts and bolts. And
that's when I took a very, really radical
diversion from what you would consider purely
financial business into the operational side of
Mitchell. I went to work in the transmission and
processing division of Mitchell Energy back in
1979. And those were exciting times for Mitchell,
the late 70s and early 80s, when, number one,
hydrocarbon prices accelerated quite a bit. But
more importantly for them, Mitchell has, I guess,
always been regarded as a small oil producer, a
medium-sized gas producer, but a giant in natural
gas liquids. And that's the area that I was in. And
about that time, they Historically, there were
controls on the price of natural gas liquids, and
those came off. Mitchell, as a low-cost producer,
benefited largely from that, such that at the peak
in my several years in the transmission and
processing division, we are generating about
$100 million a year of operating profit. That was
clearly the highest growth area of Mitchell. And I
worked for Bruce Withers, who was the president of
that division, and was involved in a variety of
things that I think made me very visible to
Mitchell Senior Management and offered... In
what sense? Well, if we would be involved in an
acquisition, I would somehow... get put on that
acquisition team as someone who had some
technical understanding but also had financial
skills. I was involved in the
The acquisition, we made a couple major plant
acquisitions back in those days. We also turned
down some major acquisitions, which were
probably, in retrospect, my biggest
contributions to the energy side of the business.
We had looked at being a participant in the MAPCO
pipeline, which I recommended against, and we had
been... looking at being the participant and the
acquisition of a major fractionation facility
down in Mount Bellevue, and I recommended against
that as well. So I had just gotten good exposure to a
variety of people senior to Mitchell's
management, but particularly I had a very good
relationship with Bruce Withers, who is the
president of that division. I really consider
Bruce as my mentor. He was one of the smartest,
certainly one of the toughest negotiators I had
ever experienced.
My understanding was that, in terms of venture
capital, that Mitchell had really begin to
wonder, ask questions relating to venture
capital going back into the 70s, even though I
think, as I recall, they might have formed a
venture capital subsidiary somewhere between 81
and 83, legally formed a subsidiary, but the
venture capital subsidiary didn't become
operational until 1983-84 when I came in to run it.
One of the stories we heard, and I think it was from
Mr. Richmond, is that, and we were wondering if
this is apocryphal or whether it really occurred,
maybe you would know, he said that about that same
time, 81, 82, that Mr. Mitchell determined that in
order to, in fact, fund or encourage the
development of the woodlands of clean, high-tech
kinds of corporations. He realized he was going to
have to nurture that in one way or another. So he
created the Venture Capital Company in about 30
seconds, he said, or something like that. Asked in
the hall or something. In the hall of Venture
Capital. you know, one of the office buildings,
and gave it, I think there wasn't a Richmond, and
said, make it happen, kind of thing. Right, right.
Have you heard that story? Yes, and, you know,
again, that precedes me in venture capital, and
I've heard versions of that, but that's pretty
close to the general theme of it. And like Mr.
Mitchell, he... Even going back before that,
though, Mr. Mitchells had asked the question for
years, why aren't we seeing in Texas more compact
computer stories, more high-technology
companies evolve? And there were a lot of reasons
for that, but one that kept coming back and back was
that Texas was not rich in venture capital. We are
historically rich here in risk capital, but not in
professional institutional venture capital.
And one of the things about George Mitchell is that
when he believes something is necessary, he'll
try to perhaps rally those that are in a better
position or more appropriate to do it to do it. But
if they won't do it, he'll say, well, it looks like
we'll have to do it type of thing. And so I think a lot
of that went into it. But initially, the concept
within the Mitchell management was that the
venture capital subsidiary would be something to
support the growth and development of the
woodlands, which wasn't necessarily a good
strategy, and I'll lead into that. About that same
time, again, looking in 1983, I think
Mr. Withers recognized that I was looking for a new
challenge, and I had really, bless his heart, he
had... advanced me. I don't remember six or eight
months going by when I either didn't get promoted
to this or moved into that, and I had spent a couple
years in the marketing side of the natural gas
liquids business, and I think he sensed that I
needed long-term growth and greater challenge
ahead, and so when this idea of the venture capital
subsidiary went around at the Mitchell
management, I think on the basis of my broader
skill package in that I had technical,
operational, financial, marketing skills that
that might be the type of person. And I really
believe it was Bruce Withers who nominated me to
either George Mitchell, Bud Clark, or Mike
Richman for the position. And we visited about it
for a couple months. And it really attracted me
from a personality profile, my tendency has
always been if I want to buy a dog or if I want to buy a
car, you know, every reference book that I can get,
every piece of information, I just consume myself
with it. And I think in retrospect, that is a good
personality profile for someone to be in venture
capital because we're, you know, we're... The
fact that we chose to focus in the medical
biomedical technology area doesn't mean that to
understand the difference between a company and
positron emissions tomography versus
biotechnology is any less onerous than
understanding a company in the oil business or a
company in the steel business. It's really
something that you need to consume yourself with.
So it was attractive to me, and so they chose me to
come in and run the venture subsidiary, and that
was about in 1984, late 83, early 84. And it was the
first company that was on the wall in December.
Right, right, December of 84. Yeah, so that really
must have been... late 83, early 84, because one of
the more intelligent things that I think we did
was, again, just as Mitchell apparently had
handed to Richmond, said make it happen, Richmond
handed to me, said no one really had any idea of what
the venture capital subsidiary should do,
whether we should invest in existing companies
and new companies and computer companies and this
company. And what I did was I was most interested in
making it successful. I was not, I believed from
day one that you could not operate a venture
capital subsidiary for the purpose of, quote,
economic development. I believed that it had to be
purely success driven with economic development
coming as a result. not as a purpose. What's the
background for that belief? Well, the background
for that belief, in my mind, was that the venture
business was a tough business to start with. And
historically, if you invest in 10 companies, if
you're lucky, one is a smashing success, a couple
do OK, a couple do pretty bad, and two or three
outright fail. And if that was the history in a
broader venture capital strategy, the idea that
we could use a really what was a relatively small
venture fund, a $15 million to attract not an
average, but the best of companies to participate
in the woodlands, my attitude was that If a
company, if it's an existing company and it's got
good management and it's got a good story, good
product to tell, it doesn't need to move anywhere
to attract its capital. Someone, wherever they
may be, they'll be able to attract the capital to
run their company. I believe that if we took that
strategy of only financing companies that would
be willing to come participate in the woodlands,
we'd be getting basically people that couldn't
get their money elsewhere, and it would be a
failing strategy. In fact, in my opinion, that is
what happened with that first company, which I'll
come to. But what I did was to manage a small venture
fund. I spent the better part of a year doing no
investing but really studying how to make this
successful. And one of the things I determined was
that back in that period of time, the early 80s, was
a period of enormous growth in venture capital
nationwide where the Excuse me, I wanted to ask
you, at some point, would you comment, in 1984 now,
we're entering the demise of high fuel prices, and
so with the collapse in Texas, how did that Well, it
really, at that time, again, I always look at the
real demise occurred mostly in 86. I think in the
spring of 86 is when they went real down. They went
down some, but people still took the attitude in 84
that, well, it's temporary. It'll come back up.
It's always going to come back up. That's the
attitude. I looked at budgets in Mitchell for
years and years, and always in the fifth year,
Prices were back up there, so there was generally
that attitude and no concern that energy prices
were going to go down long term. What I was more
concerned about was, you know, how are we going to
make this thing work? And what I saw was, although
we are going into a period of time when, you know,
venture capital, the fund sizes, the total amount
of venture capital under management nationwide
was growing, You know, that's typically when you
worry a little bit. Well, everybody's jumping on
the bandwagon. You know, everybody's doing this.
You know, the proverbial California real estate
fear that sooner or later the bubble's got to
burst, although in that example, you know, it's
only starting to show signs of that happening now.
But what I was afraid of was I saw a lot of venture
firms that were small to medium size that were
trying to emulate the strategy of the larger
venture firms. There were these large firms, the
Hambrick and Quist and the Kleiner Perkins that
could successfully invest in biotechnology in
San Diego and in telecommunications in Boston
because they had the resources, the capital, and
they had the expertise within their firms to be
able to do that. But what I saw was a whole bunch of
small to medium sized venture funds trying to do
the same thing. And if you're a small venture fund
with two or three partners, the likelihood that
you have the intellectual capability to
understand telecommunications and
biotechnology much less spend the amount your
time there requires to travel to Boston travel San
Diego you know it didn't make sense to me so I
applying that for our you know fun to be successful
not only did we have to have a regional orientation
which is what I was handed to start with but we
needed to be industry-oriented what I didn't
think we could do in my opinion was I didn't really
want to have anything to do with the computer
electronics industry. We would have just been the
115th venture fund to invest in the 197th
Winchester disk drive company. We had no
particular expertise. We had nothing that would
indicate to me that we were going to be any better
than the next guy at doing that. So what I did was I
looked at what were the strengths of our region. I
considered space commercialization. And
despite how unpopular it was politically to say
that isn't where we want to put our money at that
time in Houston, Privately, there's no way that a
small venture fund can particularly participate
in that type of industry. Agriculture was
attractive to me, and I felt Texas had the
infrastructure to do that. But that wasn't my
number one choice, and I've always said that's
something I'm going to do down the road maybe. The
microelectronics, telecommunications, we do
have some infrastructure here in Texas for that in
the San Antonio-Austin-Dallas corridor. But
again, I've tended to be a contrarian by nature,
and where everybody else is placing their bet,
that's fine, and I'm not going to necessarily bet
against it, but I'm not going to. Typically what
happens is, It gets overpriced, overbid, and it
doesn't become attractive. So I wasn't
interested in that. In the years that I spent with
Pete Marwick, I had some health care clients. That
industry always fascinated me. We were starting
to hear more about biotechnology. uh... you know
with uh... some background in chemistry uh... you
know it's funny because within our firm now uh... i
have the chemical background and i tend to believe
the world is chemistry d n a r four base pairs of
proteins are twenty amino acids one of my
partner's background is in biology and he looks at
the world is being biologically driven but
nonetheless uh... We thought that that was
something that just we had an incredible untapped
resource here, not just in Houston, but in Texas.
And what we did was we determined that the academic
institutions here in Houston were spending about
a quarter of a billion dollars a year on research
and development and you add in another half dozen
outside of houston within texas and europe to a
half billion dollars a year of research and
development in the life sciences area and this
equated would equate to an enormous
pharmaceutical or or health care company this is a
lot of money but was was maybe even more
significant to me was the fact that this wasn't
research done out in the plains of Kansas, which
was for the sake of science, the reproductive
cycle of the Drosilla fly. That may be
scientifically interesting, but might not have
any clinical significance. What we had here in
Houston particularly was these symbiotic
relationships, Baylor College of Medicine,
Methodist Hospital, UT Cancer Center, MD
Anderson, et cetera, et cetera. And what that
meant to me was that people that were writing the
research grants were having lunch with the
doctors that were trying to save lives. And
overall, I felt that much more of the research
being done here would be clinically driven.
instead of driven for the pure advancement of
science. And that was just an inherent field. What
I did, though, is I looked nationally and found,
and this surprises me, and it has changed much
since then, but back in 1983, if you took the pie
where venture capital nationwide had been
invested, you found that there was a slice there
for health care. But if you subdivided the health
care slice to extricate from it that amount of
venture capital they've gone to what I'll call the
delivery system, hospital management, HMOs,
things like that, meaning the residual slice of
that pie would be medical, biomedical technology
versus services. The percentage was incredibly
small. It was less than 5%. And when you're
talking, you know, whatever, $200 billion U.S.
healthcare industry, that seemed to be a very
small slice of a pie, that it was an industry that,
in my opinion, then and still today is one of the
maybe even few, I hate to use that word, but one of
the few industries where the United States still
has a strong technological leadership. So that
was attractive to me. The money, venture capital
money, is going to services, HMO-type
operations? There was, but even that, even if you
didn't extricate the services slice of the pie,
the slice of that pie for health care was not very
big. And there were only a couple venture capital
firms back in 83 that could say, you know, that they
invest even as little as a third of their capital in
the healthcare area. Why do you think that was? Was
it because of government regulations? Well, I
think regulatory issues probably discouraged a
lot of people. You've got to understand, the
venture industry was built upon and grown from
computers. I mean, the Silicon Valley
phenomenon. Consequently,
Most venture capitalists that have technical
backgrounds, it's electrical engineering.
People that knew bits and bytes didn't know
monoclonal antibodies and recombinant DNA. One
of
the things that Dr. Lamb mentioned is that FDA and
various regulatory agencies demand rigorous
testing and what have you before. Something which
may have been developed actually becomes a
marketable product. There's a long... There is.
And to me, that does not act as strong an impediment
to me as to invest in health care. Because on the
same token, that acts as a barrier to entry for your
competitors. So there's a flip side to that coin.
What it really does, though, is it makes in a world
market, which we're more and more into every day,
it makes U.S. companies less competitive on a
worldwide basis because it takes them more of
their capital and more of their time to get
products approved in their home market. Right.
But from a venture capital perspective, it wasn't
as big a consideration maybe as Dominic felt it
would be. But in any event, I sold everybody on that
strategy that we would focus on that. But keep in
mind that the Mitchell organization was still
pretty much of the mindset that this was a
woodlands-oriented thing. Interesting. The
first company we end up investing in was Key
Concepts, which was an electronics company, had
electronic keyboards for computers. Now, that
deal came to us, was referred to us by Lloyd Benson
III, and I turned it down. And it came in again, and I
turned it down a second time. But the next thing I
knew was... The people up here were hearing things
like, well, these people can lease 20,000 square
feet of space. And all of a sudden, the powers that
be, and I won't use names, but eventually was
determined that we should put a little bit of money
in and take a little risk on this one. And in fact, in
retrospect, it was probably the best thing that
ever happened to me. Because this was a company
that failed. And in fact, if that company had
succeeded, then what we would have been doing,
then I would have been fighting this battle of that
you just invest in companies that are willing to
move to the woodlands. But in fact, not only did it
fail, but I think It actually was kind of an
embarrassment that a company that leased all that
space and employed quite a few people became a
failure. That didn't happen overnight, and there
was no direct link to it. But in all candor, I've
always believed that that was probably one of the
more important elements to the ultimate success
of our venture capital program. Thereafter,
people, I think, were more convinced that, no, you
can't just do this as a real estate tool. This, in
fact, is a business in its own self. I have always
held that the economic development of the
woodlands will be the result of the success of the
venture program, but I have always, and the reason
that I always felt that tying the venture capital
activities to the woodlands, even in that way, was
acceptable was the fact that what we also chose as a
role to play in our venture program was that we
would work with the universities around the state
to set up new companies as a result of their
technology. Well, when you're setting up a new
company, you know, whether they're located here,
down the street, you know, in the next county, you
know, it's inconsequential generally to the
people involved. But what we also felt was, you
know, those companies, we knew many of those
companies would be the biotechnology type
companies. And again, I have always been
cognizant of the fact that these companies that we
are, we're in a world business. Everything is a
world business today. And I always place Texas as
being a country and every other state is another
country. And, you know, the economic welfare of
Texas is not only you know, what products that we
can ship to Japan but what products we can ship to
Idaho or what products from Idaho that come into
Texas that we can learn to make here. And one of the
things I recognized was that, you know, the
business of biotechnology was an intellectual
business. And it meant that the people that were,
you know, that made up the workforce of these
companies were, uh... highly trained highly
skilled highly educated uh... fairly well paid
for the most part and we were entering a period
where they were in great demand where you know a
protein chemist might have languished in an
academic laboratory for twenty years and all of a
sudden a protein chemist you know he's like uh... a
designated hitter in the american league you know
he writes his own ticket if we're gonna if we're
gonna create successful companies uh... we're
gonna be competing We're not going to be competing
against companies in Dallas and companies in Fort
Worth. We're going to be competing against
companies in San Francisco and San Diego and in
Boston. And if we're going to hire the best
intellectual talent to be able to compete with
those companies, we have to offer the package. Why
would someone come to work in Houston? to work for a
biotechnology company if they can, as an
alternative, they can go to work in Palo Alto,
particularly where, you know, scientific people
might be a little bit more risk averse, whereas if
that company happened to fail, there's another
company right down the street that they can go to
work to. They've got, you know, they've got a
culture there. They've got, you know, the
physical beauty of California or wherever. And
what we opined was to be able to recruit
management, which we didn't have. We've got all
this technology here, but never having a
prevalent or a dominating health care industry or
medical technology industry here, we don't have a
good pool of management people. So, A, we knew we
were going to be recruiting senior management
people, and we'd be recruiting them from
California and Boston and New Jersey. B, we knew
that we would have to be recruiting scientists,
and we'd be having to recruit those scientists
from the same places. I find that even though maybe
the Mitchell organization saw the woodlands as
the primary mission initially, what I saw was that
my primary mission was to finance successful
companies. If they all moved to the woodlands but
all failed, then we'd have wasted not only our
investment dollars, but all the dollars that went
into providing them space and all that. But I felt
that to enhance my ability to grow successful
companies, that the Woodlands was a genuine tool.
I felt that when I, and in all candor, I've spent as
much time recruiting people as I have doing
anything else. And I cannot attract people from
California to come to live in the city of Houston to
a large degree. And one of the biggest problems,
they land at the airport and they see sign
pollution all the way into town. And you've
already lost them. You haven't even had dinner yet
and you've lost them. So we actually here in our
organization, we saw our ability to take what was
world-class technology, which we had capital,
which is the most generic of all this. But the third
part of the triangle was management and people. We
saw our only way, perhaps, or our equalizing way to
recruit the best people was to offer this, what I
believe is this incredible, you know, element,
environment of the woodlands. So I use that more as
a tool to grow successful companies. The result,
excuse me, has been that our program has been
highly successful and as a result has, has
produced this economic development of the
woodlands, and now, fortunately, has produced a
real critical mass where there's probably
nowhere else in Texas, even though it's small by
California standards, there's no place in Texas
where there's more of a critical mass of
privatized life science companies than we have
here in the woodlands. Could you recalibrate? the
development of some of that critical mass? Sure,
sure. It was, and again, we take, you know, right
now we look back and to summarize, we have 17 or 18
companies that we have financed through the
Mitchell subsidiary and now our private
organization. We became independent of Mitchell
in 88, 89.
Rough, basically a third of those companies are
here in the woodlands and A part of our skills, of
those 18 companies, I would say eight or nine of
those companies existed from the transfer of
technology from an academic institution,
generally where we played the role of the founders
of the company. As an example, the very first
company that we acted as a lead investor in, the
very first company that was created as a result in
texas as a result of technology transfer of
academic laboratory was a company out of baylor
college of medicine in 1985 called
cardiovascular systems and cardiovascular
systems which later became known by the name
amnion inc was formed to commercialize a what we
call an autologous blood transfusion system it
was developed at baylor college of medicine
somewhat under the direction of people in Michael
DeBakey's group. And what they sought was an
ability during a surgical procedure,
particularly a thoracic-type procedure where
there was blood loss, whether in the old days,
bypass surgery produced a lot more blood loss than
it does today, but these aortic aneurysm
procedures and all that, there's a high amount of
blood loss. Two things were problematic even
before the AIDS epidemic. One was that the
availability of blood, the ability to transfuse
enough blood to keep these patients alive. And
number two, with donor transfused blood or
homologous transfusion, which means the blood
from someone else, there was clinically a fairly
significant risk associated with non-A, non-B
hepatitis. And even today, non-A, non-B,
hepatitis is clinically much higher a risk factor
than AIDS is. But nonetheless, the doctors were
familiar with this risk way back. And so what Dr.
DeBakey wanted was a better way to, and they had
some more modest systems that would take a
patient's blood during surgical procedure,
recycle it, But it would do maybe one unit of blood
every 20 minutes. Well, in one of these aneurysm
patients, you might need to go through six or seven
units of blood in 20 minutes. So making a long story
short, they developed a system that would take the
blood, it would run it through a filter, then it
would run it through a centrifuge separating the
red cells from the plasma and platelets, wash down
those red cells and re-infuse those red cells, a
unit of red cells to the patient. And it was capable
of doing this in a matter of two or three minutes. So
it meant that you could almost keep real time up.
And that not only produced much less risk of a
transfusion-related disease, but just in terms
of blood, we had a patient in California after we
started selling these from a small hospital that
they went through, you know, your body holds
roughly 17 to 20 units of blood, but if it's going in
and out, this particular case, they used, they
salvaged what they estimate was something like
150, 170 units of blood. Yeah, it was, you know,
just blood in, blood out for, you know, the eight
hours they were doing this procedure. And in this
particular case, the patient died. But what was
those people at that little hospital in
California were just so happy about was, you know,
that could have been the worst case. Not only did
they lose a patient, but they would have wiped out
the entire blood bank. And for everybody else that
needed blood, they would not have had any. So this
product was an attractive product. It was
patented. There was a patent ultimately received
on a bowl. But what was interesting was, and to this
date, That product, that technology, if you will,
I'd rather call it a product than a technology, but
that particular product had the lowest
technological profile and addressed the
smallest market, as sexy as it may seem, of all the
companies that we've since helped create. But
nonetheless, we took advantage of that. We took
advantage particularly of the fact that we had a
startup company, but yet When we launched that
product, we had a startup company, but we had a
product that had been clinically utilized at
Baylor, at Henry Ford Hospital, at the Mayo
Clinic, at a variety of attractive clinical
sites. How did the connection come between you and
the company initially? What they had was they
initially at Baylor, they tried to raise a
partnership that was going to fund a bushel basket
of projects. And that was never successful they
were never able to raise that money and one of those
projects that was in that partnership was it was
labeled a continuous blood auto transfusion
system and i said well if they're if you know you're
going to develop a continuous blood auto
transfusion system does that mean that there
exists today a discontinuous blood auto
transfusion system and they said yes and i asked
them how rapidly it would cycle a unit of blood. And
I said, you know, gee, that's pretty good just what
you have right there. Why don't we evaluate
whether that product is commercially viable? And
we did so. And so we set up the company called
Cardiovascular Systems. We became the lead
investor in the company. I hired Don Spirison, who
is now my partner, to run that. He became the
president of that company back in 85. And in a
nutshell, we financed that company in June of 85
with $1.5 million. By March-April of 86, it had
shipped its first product. By the second quarter
of 87, it hit its first profitable month. And by
1988, it had sustained profitability on a monthly
basis. And we ended up selling it for
approximately $15 million to COBE Laboratories
in 1988. So that was, if we could create that
success with such a low technology and a small
market product, it very much encouraged us that
some of the other things that we had done
subsequent to that would have even higher
potential. When you set up the venture, your
investment in this company, you buy stock, is that
how you fund it? Right, right. So when you sold for
$15 million, you sold your stock or the total? The
total, the total package. Of which part was yours?
Of which part was ours. What we have done, and
again, these technology transfer ventures have
been the ones that we have made our prized,
place that we have here in our own backyard. The
other thing was venture capitalists had not had a
historically real good relationship with
academia, the alleged vulture capitalism. And
one of the other things that I did early on was I
decided that if we're going to do this, we had to be
able to wear white hats. If we couldn't be good guys
and be successful at this, well, then we need to get
in another business at Pitt. And what we chose as,
we studied working with academia, and what we
found in California, for example, venture
capitalists would typically create a company,
and then they would bring in the scientists as
employees, full-time employees of that company,
and, you know, license and technology and all
that. But what that was doing was, you know, it was
robbing the institutions of some of their best
people. and hence the vulture capitalist thing.
And I thought, jeez, there's got to be a better
formula. Plus, I didn't like the idea of just
licensing. I thought we needed to find a mechanism
where everybody was on the same playing field,
where it was a we type of a thing instead of a we
versus they. And our prescription for that was to
make sure that everybody had the same vested
ownership and that what we would do when we created
a new company, we would set up a new company, in this
case, Cardiovascular Systems. We would provide
for licensing the technology from Baylor College
of Medicine to the company that Baylor would get
equity, would get stock ownership, that the
investigator who had developed the technology
would get equity ownership in the company, that
we, through our capital investment, would get
equity ownership, and then management that we
brought in through their earning their equity by
running the company, they would have equity
ownership. And consequently, we are all
interested and we would all benefit in the success
or be hurt by the failure in the same way. So there
wasn't any games to be played. Is there any formula
for control of the company management? Did you
carefully avoid having 51% of the stock? Well,
we're not opposed to having control. On the other
hand, it is varied on a deal by deal. Some venture
capitalists are overwhelmingly concerned about
control. In our case, We weren't. We took the
attitude that, you know, we're going to be pretty
darn selective of the people we're going to do
business with. Well, in all honesty, it's in all
candor that it has, you know, generally as a rule of
thumb, it has been more of a problem as a venture
capitalist when you don't have control. And the
reason you're concerned about control is not when
times are going good, but when times are going bad.
And one thing that we did want to avoid was, again,
we allowed this ownership to happen despite the
fact that we left the academic scientist at the
academic institution. And we paid, you know, we
might have paid them a little as a consultant, but
we didn't rob those people. Number one, we wanted
the Baylor administration to think kindly enough
of us so that we could do deal number two and deal
number 13 But also, we didn't want to have academic
scientists believing that they could run
companies either and involved in the day-to-day
management of the company. We gave everybody the
same vested interest, but we wanted everybody to
have their appropriate role within the venture.
Interestingly, at that time, we could do that with
Baylor. But back when we started doing that in 85,
we could not do that with any of the state
institutions. And in fact, I personally spent a
lot of trips to Austin to help
participate in the drafting of House Bill 1402,
which was passed, I think, in 86, which then
allowed the state institutions and their faculty
members to have stock in companies that were
commercially launched. When was that passed?
That was passed in 1986.
And we, after Cardiovascular Systems, we were
actually the founder of the first company
commercial enterprise launched from any of the
University of Texas, 13 components. That company
was called Life Cell Corporation, and that came
out of the Health Science Center here in Houston.
That company's here in the Woodlands. And we were
also involved in the creation of the first company
out of the University of Texas, MD Anderson. about
that same period, a company now called Argus
Pharmaceuticals, which is here in the Woodlands.
Let me follow up on something that we started and
straightened up. You were giving us this case
study about cardiovascular systems. One of the
things you mentioned earlier was it was sold.
Henry asked you about control and what have you.
How was the decision made? How did the... To sell?
How was the decision made? The Board of Directors
makes that decision. In this particular case, the
venture capitalists did own more than 50,
collectively, all the venture capitalists that
were in that deal owned more than 50% of the stock.
But the venture, we had debate over what we should
do. In that particular case, an interesting case
study, our reason to sell, and we're at a time when
the company was profitable, was growing, It was
beating its major competitor, a company 10 times
its size, three out of four times that we would take
them on head-to-head in the marketplace. We were
beating them. The problem was multifold. One is
that, fine, we are beating them three out of four
times we are taking them on head-to-head. They
were growing like crazy, too, because they were
finding three or four other hospitals that we
could never reach because we had a limited sales
force of about six people. And we could not justify
growing our sales force on that single product
alone because, again, the market was relatively
small. What we needed was we needed another
product or two to add to our sales people's efforts
so we could justify a large sales force. We spent
the better part of a year trying to identify a
product or a company to acquire, and we actually
came up with one. We negotiated a letter of intent
to acquire the Sorensen product line from Abbott
Laboratories. The problem was that we had a
difficult time financing that acquisition,
because this was now, when we did this, this was in
88, and Texas banks were in bad shape then. And what
happened was that this was an acquisition that I
believe the total acquisition price was about $9
million. We didn't want to, we wanted to put in,
say, maybe a seven, somewhere seven. We wanted to
put about half of it in as equity and half of it in as
debt. We didn't want to over leverage the company.
And the company was now profitable. The
acquisition could clearly show that its cash flow
could service the debt. The problem was that Texas
banks weren't doing anything. The deal was
attractive to out-of-state banks, but because we
were only looking to borrow $3 or $4 million, the
out-of-state banks said, well, we just can't loan
that small amount. We'd have to do 5 to 10 to be able
to get it approved.